.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 ... 2022 2023
.\"     John McCue <jmccue@jmcunx.com>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.TH JR 1 "2019-11-19" "JMC" "Local Command"
.SH NAME
jr - reformats text column data
.SH SYNOPSIS
jr [OPTIONS] [FILE...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Reformats column data of one or more files,
creating one output file.
Can also convert flat files to delimited and vice-a-versa.
.PP
If no files (FILE) are specified on the command line or
if FILE has name '-', stdin (Standard Input) is used.
.TP
-C type,col_pos,col_size[,new_size][,format]
Can be specified multiple number of times, once for each
per field you want to process.
See -P below for more detail.
.TP
-P file
Obtain column information from 'file', this file
contains comma separated records with the the fields below.
Note, empty records are ignored, and data following a '#' is ignored,
character '#' is the comment character.
.IP
Arguments '-C' and '-P' uses comma delimited data, field
values:
.nf
   field        Description
   ------------ -------------------------------------------------
   type         Field type, valid values:
                    c = character data
                    d = dates
                    n = numeric data
   col_pos      is the starting position of the column OR
                the field location when the file is delimited.
   col_size     is the length of the column.
   new_col_size Optional, the size you want to use on output,
                if not specified, will default to 'col_size'.
                Empty values are allowed if you need to specify
                a 'format' or 'title' value.
   format       Optional, reformat column data, valid values:
                    e = Remove embedded white spaces in string
                    f = Fix numeric data.  Remove thousand
                        separators, move trailing minus sign
                        to the start of the number, print a
                        leading zero if the first character
                        is a decimal point.
                    L = Translate string to Lowercase
                    r = Remove all characters specified by
                        argument (-s) from string
                    t = Trim character data.  Remove trailing
                        spaces and left justifies the string
                    U = Translate string to Uppercase
                    z = pad number/character with leading zeros
                depending upon the value of 'type', some of
                these items are ignored.  Empty value allowed
                if you need to specify 'title' value.  Multiple
                values are allowed, just string them together.
   title        Optional Title, informational, displayed
                on the log report (-r).
.fi
The order these are specified determines the order the
columns are written to the output file.
.TP
-d delm
Is the Input a delimited file ?
If so, supply the delimiter as a specific character or a decimal
number that represents the character.
For example to use:
.nf
    delimiter  Use arg
    ---------  -------------------
       |       -d '|'  OR -d 124
       TAB     -d 9
       ^G      -d 7
.fi
If not specified, the file assumed to be a flat file.
.TP
-D delm
Is the Output a delimited file ?
If so, supply the delimiter as a specific character or a decimal
number that represents the character.
For example to use:
.nf
    delimiter  Use arg
    ---------  -------------------
       |       -D '|'  OR -D 124
       TAB     -D 9
       ^G      -D 7
.fi
If not specified, the file will be created as a flat file
.TP
-e file
Optional, if used, write error messages to file 'file'.
If not specified, errors written to stderr.
.TP
-f
Force file create.
Create file even if the target file exists.
.TP
-G string
Optional Global Output Format Hints, see below for string definition.
.TP
-g string
Optional Global Input Format Hints, see below for string definition.
.IP
Format of 'string' for Global Hints (-G and -g above).
This is a comma separated string which contains these values,
if not specified defaults are noted:
.nf
    value  meaning
    -----  --------------------------------------------------
      c    Decimal point is a comma, default is a period.
      d    Date Separator is a '-'
      s    Date Separator is a '/', this is the default.
      1    date format is YYYYMMDD, this is the default
      2    date format is MM/DD/YY
      3    date format is DD/MM/YY
      4    date format is YY/MM/DD
      5    date format is MM/DD/YYYY
      6    date format is DD/MM/YYYY
      7    date format is YYYY/MM/DD

      'Date Separator' will be used to format date depending
      upon format selected, default is shown in date examples.
.fi
.IP
Example, '-G c,d,5' is an example of the argument.
.TP
-h
Show brief help and exit.
.TP
-o file
Optional, if used, write output to file 'file'.
If not specified, output written to stdout.
.TP
-r file
Optional, generate a log report of data processed
and how processed.
Will show detail when data errors occur.
.TP
-s string
Optional, strip these characters from the string if
format type 'r' is specified, see -C & -P above.
.TP
-t
Write column titles to the first record
of the Output File.
Titles are retrieved from arguments -C & -P above.
If titles do not exist, they are not printed.
.TP
-v
verbose, print file stats and Warning Messages.
.TP
-V
output version information and exit.
.SH EXAMPLE
Convert a 5 column pipe delimited file to a flat
file formatted with these 3 columns in this order:
.nf
    Column  Type    Size  Title    Action
    ------  ------  ----  ------  ------------------------
       3    number    11  Count   Fix Numeric Data
       1    char      20  Name    Trim and remove embedded
       4    char      15  City    Convert to upper case
.fi
Will also increase Output column size of all fields by 1 space.
.nf
    jr -d 124 -C n,3,11,12,f,Count \\
              -C c,1,20,21,te,Name \\
              -C c,4,15,16,U,Code infile > outfile
.fi
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Note, if an error occurs while parsing command line arguments,
errors may be written stderr instead of the error file specified.
.PP
Right now, time portion or a date/time field marked as
date is ignored.
Dates are converted fine, time portion is truncated.
For now, if you want to keep time portion of a
date/time string use type 'c'.
Eventually a new convert type will be added (date/time).
.SH SEE-ALSO
awk(1),
col(1),
cut(1),
paste(1),
sed(1)
.SH ERROR-CODES
.nf
0 success
1 processing error or help/rev displayed
.fi
